---
layout: single
classes: wide
title:  "Ad Blocker From Scratch, Part 2: DNS Sinkhole"
date:   2021-04-05 12:00:00 -0600
categories: adblocking prototypes
---

An ad blocking DNS server can be built fairly easily. 
Doing this demonstrates the principles behind [PiHole](https://pi-hole.net/), which provides network level ad blocking.

Recall the discussion on DNS ad blocking in [part one](https://inahga.github.io/inahglog/adblocking/prototypes/security/2021/03/14/adblock-pt1.html#dns-ad-blocking).
We'll be setting up a practical version in this post.

PiHole uses [dnsmasq](https://thekelleys.org.uk/dnsmasq/doc.html), a lightweight DNS server.
It uses its own curated list of known ad serving domains, and returns invalid DNS responses for them.

I'm going to use `dnsmasq` as well, and use Steven Black's [lists](https://github.com/StevenBlack/hosts).

### /etc/hosts
When a program makes a DNS query, it does not first query a DNS server.
It will first check the local `/etc/hosts`, or `C:\Windows\System32\Drivers\etc\hosts` if on Windows, file to see if the query is matched.
If so, the DNS server is never even contacted.

With this, we could download one of the curated lists into our `/etc/hosts` file, and be done.

That's no fun though.
It also does us no good for systems that don't expose `/etc/hosts`, or if we don't want to deal with the heft of updating `/etc/hosts` on multiple machines.
Thus we'll engineer our own DNS server.

### Infrastructure
I'm going to use a server hosted on AWS for this project.
There's no reason you can't do this on bare metal or another cloud platform.

Let's spawn a t2.micro instance with Ubuntu 20.04 LTS.
Our usage should fall under free tier.
```bash
aws ec2 run-instances --image-id ami-0928f4202481dfdf6 --count 1 --instance-type t2.micro --key-name aghani
```

Open up 53/tcp and 53/udp on the security group associated with your instance.
Use `aws ec2 describe-instances` if you aren't sure of the name of your security group.
```bash
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --group-name default --protocol tcp --port 53 --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --group-name default --protocol tcp --port 53 --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
```

Install `dnsmasq`
```bash
sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install dnsmasq -y
```

### dnsmasq
We need to edit `/etc/dnsmasq.conf` to configure `dnsmasq`.
Opening this file will reveal a whole bunch of documentation and commented out options.
I'll go over the options we need to modify.

```ini
interface=eth0
```
This will let us listen on the public interface.
Replace this with the name of your network interface.
Use `ip a` if unsure.

```ini
bind-interfaces
```
This is only relevant for systems that have `systemd-resolved`, which nowadays is most modern Linux distributions.
`systemd-resolved` provides its own stub DNS server that listens on `127.0.0.53:53`.
This is a port conflict!
Using `bind-interfaces` will avoid this conflict.

```ini
log-queries
```
I'd like to see what it's doing!

With `dnsmasq` setup, enable and start it.
```bash
sudo systemctl enable dnsmasq --now
```

### Hosts List
`dnsmasq` is actually ludicriously simple.
It will simply reference the server's `/etc/hosts` first, then move on to the system DNS servers failing that.

Thus we just need to download our curated hosts list into `/etc/hosts`!
It's also suggested to restart `dnsmasq` so that its internal DNS cache can be cleared.
```bash
sudo curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/StevenBlack/hosts/master/hosts -o /etc/hosts
sudo systemctl restart dnsmasq
```

Note that this is putting a lot of faith in our friend Steven Black.
We'll have to hope this URL never falls victim to foul play.
The alternative is to curate a list yourself (good luck), or find another provider that you trust.

Throwing this into cron is also a good idea.
```bash
sudo tee /etc/cron.daily/refresh.sh <<EOF
#!/bin/bash
set -euo pipefail
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/StevenBlack/hosts/master/hosts -o /tmp/hosts
mv /tmp/hosts /etc/hosts
EOF

chmod +x refresh.sh
```

### Testing
Watch `dnsmasq` in a separate terminal or pane.
```
sudo journalctl -xefu dnsmasq
```

Then, ensure that you can make DNS queries while logged into the server.
```
dig +127.0.0.1 google.com
```

Hop on to an internet connected machine, then try another query.
Replace `1.2.3.4` with the IP address of your server.
```
dig +1.2.3.4 google.com
```

Now, for the ultimate test, change your personal computer's DNS server to the IP address of your server.
In distros that have `systemd-resolved`, use this incantation for a temporary switch. 
Replace `wlp3s0` with the name of your network interface, and `1.2.3.4` with the IP address of your server.
```
sudo resolvectl dns wlp3s0 1.2.3.4
```
Again, use `ip a` if you're unsure of the name of the network interface.

Visit any ad infested website, and things should look much clearer!
The Weather Channel's [website](https://weather.com/) is my go to for this.
Watch your server's logs to see the onslaught of various DNS requests that get sinkholed.

Be careful to make sure that your browser doesn't do any funny business with DNS.
Firefox is known to automatically enable DNS over HTTPS, which I think is fantastic, but will interfere with this experiment.

### Cleanup
Terminate your EC2 instance with `aws ec2 terminate-instances`.
Use `aws ec2 revoke-security-group-egress` for security group cleanup.

Use `sudo systemctl restart systemd-resolved` to clear custom DNS entries from your personal machine.

### A Note About Systemd
Note that this configuration of `dnsmasq` relies on the distribution having `systemd-resolved`.

AWS will automatically configure the EC2 instance with a sane network configuration, including a DNS server configuration.
This is picked up by `systemd-resolved`, thus using the AWS DNS server as the system DNS server.

`systemd-resolved` exposes by running a dummy DNS server by binding to `127.0.0.53:53`.
This is stored in `/etc/resolv.conf` which is the typical file for configuring the system DNS server.

Thus, the flow of all DNS requests is going from `dnsmasq`->`systemd-resolved`->AWS DNS server.

The Arch Wiki has some helpful articles on [dnsmasq](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/dnsmasq) and [systemd-resolved](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Systemd-resolved) that can help with understanding this flow.

### Summary
As this hopefully shows, a simple DNS sinkhole server is fairly simple to set up.
I'd still suggest sticking with PiHole for any serious use, but at least we now have greater insight into how it works.
